TEXT  FLY  WITHIN 
THE  BOOK  ONLY 


Tight  Binding  Book 


CO  >  UJ  ± 

ft  <OU_1 68052  >m 


OUP— 2273— 19-1 1-79— 10,000  Copies. 

OSMANIA  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY 

Call  No    ^^L  Accession  No  ^95  gg 

Author      -j-  0  4.STt>  y^ 

Title         W<U    £*'<P4>*'(*~' 

This  book  should  bc^rcturned  on  or  before  the  date  last  marked  below. 


War  and  Peace 


BY  LEO  TOLSTOY 


Translated  b\  LOUISE  and  AYLMER  MAUDE 


WILLIAM  BENTON,  Publisher 


ENCYCLOPEDIA  BR1TANNICA,  INC. 


CHICAGO  -  LONDON  -  TORONTO 


BY  ARRANGEMENT  WITH  OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 


COPYRIGHT  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA,  1952, 
BY  ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA,INC. 

COPYRIGHT  1952.   COPYRIGHT  UNDER  INTERNATIONAL  COPYRIG^ 
ENCYCLOP  *:DIA  BRITANNICA,  INC.   ALL  RIGHTS  RESERVED  UNDER 
COPYRIGHT  CONVENTIONS  BY  ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANJ^ 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 
LEO  TOLSTOY,  1828—1910 


COUNT  LEO  NIKOLAYEVICH  TOLSTOY  was  born 
August  28,  1828,  at  the  family  estate  of  Yasna- 
ya  Polyana,  in  the  province  of  Tula.  His  moth- 
er died  when  he  was  three  and  his  father  six 
years  later.  Placed  in  the  care  of  his  aunts,  he 
passed  many  of  his  early  years  at  Kazan,  where, 
in  1844,  after  a  preliminary  training  by  French 
tutors,  he  entered  the  university.  He  cared  lit- 
tle for  the  university  and  in  1847  withdrew  be- 
cause of  "ill-health  and  domestic  circum- 
stances." He  had,  however,  done  a  great  deal 
of  reading,  of  French,  English,  and  Russian 
novels,  the  New  Testament,  Voltaire,  and 
Hegel.  The  author  exercising  the  greatest  in- 
fluence upon  him  at  this  time  was  Rousseau; 
he  read  his  complete  works  and  for  sometime 
wore  about  his  neck  a  medallion  of  Rousseau. 

Immediately  upon  leaving  the  university, 
Tolstoy  returned  to  his  estate  and,  perhaps  inr 
spired  by  his  enthusiasm  for  Rousseau,  pre- 
pared to  devote  himself  to  agriculture  and  to 
improving  the  condition  of  his  serfs.  His  first 
attempt  at  social  reform  proved  disappointing, 
and  after  six  months  he  withdrew  to  Moscow 
and  St.  Petersburg,  where  he  gave  himself  over 
to  the  irregular  life  characteristic  of  his  class 
and  time.  In  1851,  determined  to  "escape  my 
debts  and,  more  than  anything  else,  my  hab- 
its," he  enlisted  in  the  Army  as  a  gentleman- 
volunteer,  and  went  to  the  Caucasus.  While  at 
Tiflis,  preparing  for  his  examinations  as  a 
cadet,  he  wrote  the  first  portion  of  the  trilogy, 
Childhood,  Boyhood,  and  Youth,  in  which  he 
celebrated  the  happiness  of  "being  with  Na- 
ture, seeing  her,  communing  with  her."  He  al- 
so began  The  Cossacks  with  the  intention  of 
showing  that  culture  is  the  enemy  of  happi- 
ness. Although  continuing  his  army  life,  he 
gradually  came  to  realize  that  "a  military  ca- 
reer is  not  for  me,  and  the  sooner  I  get  out  of 
it  and  devote  myself  entirely  to  literature  the 
better."  His  Sevastopol  Sketches  (1855)  were 
so  successful  that  Czar  Nicholas  issued  special 
orders  that  he  should  be  removed  from  a  post 
of  danger. 

Returning  to  St.  Petersburg,  Tolstoy  was  re- 
ceived with  great  favor  in  both  the  official  and 
literary  circles  of  the  capital.  He  soon  became 


interested  in  the  popular  progressive  move- 
ment of  the  time,  and  in  1857  he  decided  to  go 
abroad  and  study  the  educational  and  munici- 
pal systems  of  other  countries.  That  year,  and 
again  in  1860,  he  traveled  in  Europe.  At  Yas- 
naya  Polyana  in  1861  he  liberated  his  serfs  and 
opened  a  school,  established  on  the  principle 
that  "everything  which  savours  of  compulsion 
is  harmful."  He  started  a  magazine  to  promote 
his  notions  on  education  and  at  the  same  time 
served  as  an  official  arbitrator  for  grievances 
between  the  nobles  and  the  recently  emanci- 
pated serfs.  By  the  end  of  1863  he  was  so  ex- 
hausted that  he  discontinued  his  activities  and 
retired  to  the  steppes  to  drink  koumis  for  his 
health. 

Tolstoy  had  been  contemplating  marriage 
for  some  time,  and  in  1862  he  married  Sophie 
Behrs,  sixteen  years  his  junior,  and  the  daugh- 
ter of  a  fashionable  Moscow  doctor.  Their 
early  married  life  at  Yasnaya  Polyana  was 
tranquil.  Family  cares  occupied  the  Countess, 
and  in  the  course  of  her  life  she  bore  thirteen 
children,  nine  of  whom  survived  infancy.  Yet 
she  also  acted  as  a  copyist  for  her  husband, 
who  after  their  marriage  turned  again  to  writ- 
ing. He  was  soon  at  work  upon  "a  novel  of 
the  i8io's  and  *2o's"  which  absorbed  all  his 
time  and  effort.  He  went  frequently  to  Mos- 
cow, "studying  letters,  diaries,  and  traditions" 
and  "accumulated  a  whole  library"  of  histori- 
cal material  on  the  period.  He  interviewed 
survivors  of  the  battles  of  that  time  and  trav- 
eled to  Borodino  to  draw  up  a  map  of  the 
battleground.  Finally,  in  1869,  after  his  work 
had  undergone  several  changes  in  conception 
and  he  had  "spent  five  years  of  uninterrupted 
andjgxceptionally  strenuous  labor  Tnnierthe 
IbesfcondUtions  of  life/'  he  published  War  and 
Peace.  Its  appearance  immediately  established 
Tolstoy's  reputation,  and  in  the  judgment  of 
Turgenev,  the  acknowledged  dean  of  Russian 
letters,  gave  him  "first  place  among  all  our 
contemporary  writers." 

The  years  immediately  following  the  com- 
pletion of  War  and  Peace  were  pa**efl  in  a 
great  variety  of  occupations,  none  of  which 
Tohtoy  found  satisfying.  He  tried  busying 


VI 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


himself  with  the  affairs  of  his  estate,  under- 
took the  learning  of  Greek  to  read  the  ancient 
classics,  turned  again  to  education,  wrote  a 
series  of  elementary  school  books,  and  served 
as  school  inspector.  With  much  urging  from 
his  wife  and  friends,  he  completed  Anna  Kare- 
nina,  which  appeared  serially  between  1875 
and  1877.  Disturbed  by  what  he  considered  his 
unreflective  and  prosperous  existence,  Tolstoy 
became  increasingly  interested  in  religion.  At 
first  he  turned  to  the  orthodox  faith  of  the 
people.  Unable  to  find  rest  there,  he  began  a 
detailed  examination  of  religions,  and  out  of 
his  reading,  particularly  of  the  Gospels,  gradu- 
ally evolved  his  own  personal  doctrine. 

Following  his  conversion,  Tolstoy  adopted 
a  new  mode  of  life.  He  dressed  like  a  peasant, 
devoted  much  of  his  time  to  manual  work, 
learned  shoemaking,  and  followed  a  vegetari- 
an diet.  With  the  exception  of  his  youngest 
daughter,  Alexandra,  Tolstoy's  family  re- 
mained hostile  to  his  teaching.  The  breach  be- 
tween him  and  his  wife  grew  steadily  wider. 
In  1879  he  wrote  the  Kreutzer  Sonata  in  which 
he  attacked  the  normal  state  of  marriage  and 
extolled  a  life  of  celibacy  and  chastity.  In  1881 
he  divided  his  estate  among  his  heirs  and,  a 
few  years  later,  despite  the  opposition  of  his 
wife,  announced  that  he  would  forego  royal- 
ties on  all  the  works  published  after  his  con- 
version. 

Tolstoy  made  no  attempt  at  first  to  propa- 
gate his  religious  teaching,  although  it  attracted 


many  followers.  After  a  visit  to  the  Moscow 
slums  iri  1881,  he  became  concerned  with  social 
conditions,  and  he  subsequently  aided  the  suf- 
ferers of  the  famine  by  sponsoring  two  hun- 
dred and  fifty  relief  kitchens.  After  his  meet- 
ing and  intimacy  with  Chertkov,  "Tolstoyism" 
began  to  develop  as  an  organized  sect.  Tol- 
stoy's writings  became  almost  exclusively  pre- 
occupied with  religious  problems.  In  addition 
to  numerous  pamphlets  and  plays,  he  wrote 
IV hat  is  Art?  (1896),  in  which  he  explained 
his  new  aesthetic  theories,  and  Hadji-Murad, 
(1904),  which  became  the  favorite  work  of  his 
old  age.  Although  his  activities  were  looked 
upon  with  increasing  suspicion  by  the  official 
authorities,  Tolstoy  escaped  official  censure 
until  1901,  when  he  was  excommunicated  by 
the  Orthodox  Church.  His  followers  were  fre- 
quently  subjected  to  persecution,  and  many 
were  either  banished  or  imprisoned. 

Tolstoy's  last  years  were  embittered  by 
mounting  hostility  within  his  own  household. 
Although  his  personal  life  was  ascetic,  he  felt 
the  ambiguity  of  his  position  as  a  preacher  of 
poverty  living  on  his  great  estate.  Finally,  at 
the  age  of  eighty-two,  with  the  aid  of  his  daugh- 
ter, Alexandra,  he  fled  from  home.  His  health 
broke  down  a  few  days  later,  and  he  was  re- 
moved from  the  train  to  the  station-master's 
hut  at  Astopovo,  where  he  died,  November  7, 
1910.  He  was  buried  at  Yasnaya  Polyana,  in 
the  first  public  funeral  to  be  held  in  Russia 
without  religious  rites. 


CONTEXTS 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE  v 

The  Principal  Characters  in  War  and  Peace 

Arranged  in  Family  Groups  xv 

Dates  of  Principal  Historical  Events  xvi 

BOOK  ONE 

1-5.  Anna  Sche'rer's  soiree  i 

6-3.  Pierre  at  Prince  Andrew's  1 1 

9.  Pierre   at  Anatole  Kurdgin's.  D61ok- 

hov's  bet  15 

10.  A  name  day  at  the  Rost6vs'  18 

11-1*4.  Natasha  and  Boris  20 

15.  Anna  Mikhdylovna  and  Bon's  go  to  the 

dying  Count  Beziikhov's  26 

16.  Pierre  at  his  father's  house;  talks  with 

Boris  27 

17.  Countess  Rost6va  and  Anna  Mikhay- 

lovna  30 

18-19.  Dinner  at  the  Rost6vs'.  Marya  Dmitri- 

cvna  31 

20.  S6nyaand  Natasha.  Nicholassings.The 

Daniel  Cooper  35 

21.  At  Count  Bczukhov's.  Prince  Vasfli  and 

Catiche  37 

22-23.  Anna  Mikhdylovna  and  Pierre  at  Count 

Bczukhov's  41 

24.  Anna  Mikhdylovna  and  Catiche  strug- 

gle for  the  inlaid  portfolio  45 

25.  Bald  Hills.   Prince  N.  A.  Bolkonski. 

Princess  Mary's  correspondence  with 

Julie  Kardgina  47 

26-27.  Prince  Andrew  at  Bald  Hills  51 

28.  Prince  Andrew  leaves  to  join  the  army. 

Princess  Mary  gives  him  an  icon    55 

BOOK  TWO 

1-2.  Review  near  Braunau.  Zherk6v  and 
D61okhov  60 

3.  Kutuzov  and  an  Austrian  general. ^Le 

malheureux  Mack.  Zherk6v's  fool- 
ery 65 

4.  Nicholas  and  Denisov.  Telydnin  and 

the  missing  purse  68 

5.  Nicholas  in  trouble  with  his  fellow  of- 

ficers 72 

6-8.  Crossing  the  Enns.  Burning  the  bridge. 

Rost6v's  baptism  of  fire  74 

9.  Prince  Andrew  sent  with  dispatches  to 

the  Austrian  court.  The  Minister  of 

War  81 


10.  Prince(Andrew  and  Billbin  83 

1 1.  Hippolyte  Kuragin  and  les  ndtres     86 

12.  Prince  Andrew  received  by  the  Emper- 

or Francis.  Bilibin's  story  of  the  Tha- 
bor  Bridge  87 

13-14.  Prince  Andrew  returns  to  Kutuzov. 
Bagrati6n  sent  to  Hollabriinn. 
Napoleon's  letter  to  Murat  89 

15.  Prince  Andrew  reports  to  Bagrati6n. 

Captain  Tiishin.  Soldiers  at  the  front. 
D61okhov  talks  to  a  French  grena- 
dier 94 

16.  Prince  Andrew  surveys  the  position. 

The  first  shot  96 

17.  Bagration  in  action.  Tiishin's  battery. 

Setting  Schon  Grabern  on  fire        97 
18-19.  Battle  scenes.  Quarrelsome  command- 
ers. Nicholas  injured  99 

20.  Panic.  Timokhirfs  counterattack.  D6- 

lokhov's  insistence. Tiishin's  battery. 
Prince  Andrew  sent  to  order  him  to 
retreat  104 

2 1 .  Withdrawal  of  the  forces.  Nicholas  rides 

on  a  gun  carriage.  Tiishin  called  to 
account  by  Bagrati6n.  Prince  Andrew 
defends  him.  Nicholas'  depression 

106 

BOOK  THREE 

1-2.  Prince  Vasfli  and  Pierre.  A  soiree  at 
AnnaPa vlovna's.  IMene'sname  day. 
Pierre's  marriage  1 1 1 

3.  Prince  Vasili  and  Anatole  visit  Prince 

N.  A.  Bolkonski.  Princess  Mary's  ap- 
pearance 119 

4.  Lise,  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  Mary, 

Anatole,  and  old  Bolkonski 